---
references:
- id: mashayek15
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Mashayek
    given: A.
  - family: Ferrari
    given: R.
  - family: Nikurashin
    given: M.
  - family: Peltier
    given: W. R.
  issued:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '7'
    day: '31'
  accessed:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '11'
    day: '3'
  title: Influence of enhanced abyssal diapycnal mixing on stratification and the
    ocean overturning circulation
  container-title: Journal of Physical Oceanography
  container-title-short: J. Phys. Oceanogr.
  page: '2580-2597'
  volume: '45'
  issue: '10'
  abstract: The meridional overturning circulation (MOC) is composed of interconnected
    overturning cells that transport cold dense abyssal waters formed at high latitudes
    back to the surface. Turbulent diapycnal mixing plays a primary role in setting
    the rate and patterns of the various overturning cells that constitute the MOC.
    The focus of the analyses in this paper will be on the influence of sharp vertical
    variations in mixing on the MOC and ocean stratification. Mixing is enhanced close
    to the ocean bottom topography where internal waves generated by the interaction
    of tides and geostrophic motions with topography break. It is shown that the sharp
    vertical variations in mixing lead to the formation of three layers with different
    dynamical balances governing meridional flow. Specifically, an abyssal bottom
    boundary layer forms above the ocean floor where mixing is largest and hosts the
    northward transport of the heaviest waters from the southern channel to the closed
    basins. A deep layer forms above the bottom layer in which the upwelled waters
    return south. A third adiabatic layer lies above the other two. While the adiabatic
    layer has been studied in detail in recent years, the deep and bottom layers are
    less appreciated. It is shown that the bottom layer, which is not resolved or
    allowed for in most idealized models, must be present to satisfy the no flux boundary
    condition at the ocean floor and that its thickness is set by the vertical profile
    of mixing. The deep layer spans a considerable depth range of the ocean within
    which the stratification scale is set by mixing, in line with the classic view
    of Munk in 1966.
  keyword: Abyssal circulation, Atm/Ocean Structure/ Phenomena, Bottom currents/bottom
    water, Circulation/ Dynamics, Diapycnal mixing, eddies, Ocean circulation
  URL: http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/JPO-D-15-0039.1
  DOI: 10.1175/JPO-D-15-0039.1
  ISSN: '0022-3670'
- id: daru04
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Daru
    given: V.
  - family: Tenaud
    given: C.
  issued:
  - year: '2004'
  title: High order one-step monotonicity-preserving schemes for unsteady compressible
    flow calculations
  container-title: Journal of Computational Physics
  page: '563-594'
  volume: '193'
  issue: '2'
  DOI: 10.1016/j.jcp.2003.08.023
- id: prather86
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Prather
    given: Michael J.
  issued:
  - year: '1986'
    month: '5'
    day: '20'
  accessed:
  - year: '2016'
    month: '8'
    day: '9'
  title: Numerical advection by conservation of second-order moments
  container-title: 'Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres'
  container-title-short: J. Geophys. Res.
  page: '6671-6681'
  volume: '91'
  issue: D6
  abstract: A new, accurate, and nondiffusive method for three-dimensional advection
    of trace species is presented. The method preserves tracer structures by conserving
    the second-order moments of the spatial distribution of tracer during advection.
    Tracer concentrations are represented by separate, second-order polynomials within
    each grid box. This second-order moments method has been shown, in typical tests
    for advective schemes, to be equal or superior to presently available methods
    in terms of absolute accuracy, numerical diffusion, and computational cost.
  keyword: '3399 Meteorology and Atmospheric Dynamics: General or miscellaneous'
  URL: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1029/JD091iD06p06671/abstract
  DOI: 10.1029/JD091iD06p06671
  ISSN: '2156-2202'
  language: en-US
- id: ilicak12
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Ilıcak
    given: Mehmet
  - family: Adcroft
    given: Alistair J.
  - family: Griffies
    given: Stephen M.
  - family: Hallberg
    given: Robert W.
  issued:
  - year: '2012'
  accessed:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '7'
    day: '6'
  title: Spurious dianeutral mixing and the role of momentum closure
  container-title: Ocean Modelling
  container-title-short: Ocean Modelling
  page: '37-58'
  volume: 45–46
  abstract: This paper examines spurious dianeutral transport within a suite of ocean
    models (GOLDGOLD, MITgcmMITgcm, MOMMOM, and ROMSROMS). We quantify such transport
    through a global diagnostic that computes the reference potential energy, whose
    evolution arises solely through transport between density classes. Previous studies
    have focused on the importance of accurate tracer advection schemes in reducing
    the spurious transport and closure. The present study highlights complementary
    issues associated with momentum transport. Spurious dianeutral transport is shown
    to be directly proportional to the lateral grid Reynolds number (ReΔReΔ), with
    such transport significantly reduced when ReΔReΔ &lt; 10.Simulations with the
    isopycnal model GOLDGOLD provide a benchmark for the smallest level of spurious
    dianeutral transport realizable in our model suite. For idealized simulations
    with a linear equation of state, GOLDGOLD exhibits identically zero spurious dianeutral
    mixing, and thus maintains a constant reference potential energy when all physical
    mixing processes are omitted. Amongst the non-isopycnal models tested in idealized
    simulations, ROMSROMS generally produces smaller spurious dianeutral mixing than
    MITgcmMITgcm or MOMMOM, since ROMSROMS makes use of a higher order upwind-biased
    scheme for momentum transport that enforces a small ReΔReΔ. In contrast, MITgcmMITgcm
    and MOMMOM both employ unbiased (centered) discretizations of momentum transport,
    and therefore rely on lateral friction operators to control the grid Reynolds
    number. We find that a lateral shear-dependent Smagorinsky viscosity provides
    an effective means to locally reduce ReΔReΔ, and thus to reduce spurious dianeutral
    transport in MITgcmMITgcm and MOMMOM.In addition to four idealized simulations,
    we quantify spurious dianeutral transport in realistic global ocean climate simulations
    using GOLDGOLD and MOMMOM with a realistic equation of state for seawater, both
    with and without mesoscale eddies in the resolved flow field. The GOLDGOLD simulations
    have detectable levels of spurious cabbeling from along isopycnal advective truncation
    errors. Significantly larger spurious dianeutral transport arises in a non-eddying
    MOMMOM simulation. In an eddying MOMMOM simulation, spurious dianeutral transport
    is larger still but is reduced by increasing momentum friction.
  keyword: Cabbeling, Exchange-flow, Momentum transport, ocean models, Overflows,
    Reference potential energy, Spurious dianeutral transport, Tracer advection
  URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500311001685
  DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2011.10.003
  ISSN: '1463-5003'
- id: hofmeister10
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Hofmeister
    given: Richard
  - family: Burchard
    given: Hans
  - family: Beckers
    given: Jean-Marie
  issued:
  - year: '2010'
  accessed:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '11'
    day: '12'
  title: Non-uniform adaptive vertical grids for 3D numerical ocean models
  container-title: Ocean Modelling
  container-title-short: Ocean Modelling
  page: '70-86'
  volume: '33'
  issue: '1'
  abstract: A new strategy for the vertical gridding in terrain-following 3D ocean
    models is presented here. The vertical grid adaptivity is partially given by a
    vertical diffusion equation for the vertical layer positions, with diffusivities
    being proportional to shear, stratification and distance from the boundaries.
    In the horizontal, the grid can be smoothed with respect to z-levels, grid layer
    slope and density. Lagrangian tendency of the grid movement is supported. The
    adaptive terrain-following grid can be set to be an Eulerian–Lagrangian grid,
    a hybrid σ – ρ or σ –z grid and combinations of these with great flexibility.
    With this, internal flow structures such as thermoclines can be well resolved
    and followed by the grid. A set of idealised examples is presented in the paper,
    which show that the introduced adaptive grid strategy reduces pressure gradient
    errors and numerical mixing significantly. The grid adaption strategy is easy
    to implement in various types of terrain-following ocean models. The idealised
    examples give evidence that the adaptive grids can improve realistic, long-term
    simulations of stratified seas while keeping the advantages of terrain-following
    coordinates.
  keyword: 3D ocean modelling, Adaptive non-uniform grid, Numerical mixing
  URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500309002248
  DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2009.12.003
  ISSN: '1463-5003'
- id: leclair11
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Leclair
    given: Matthieu
  - family: Madec
    given: Gurvan
  issued:
  - year: '2011'
  accessed:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '11'
    day: '15'
  title: Z̃-coordinate, an arbitrary lagrangian–Eulerian coordinate separating high
    and low frequency motions
  container-title: Ocean Modelling
  container-title-short: Ocean Modelling
  page: '139-152'
  volume: '37'
  issue: '3'
  abstract: A new geopotential based vertical coordinate, named z ˜ , is presented,
    that treats external motions as a z∗-coordinate, internal low frequency motions
    in a Eulerian way and high frequency ones in a Lagrangian way. To that purpose,
    a prognostic equation for the low frequency horizontal flux divergence is added
    in the system in order to discriminate between low and high frequency parts of
    vertical motions. This coordinate keeps the intrinsic advantages of the z-coordinate
    while enabling a drastic reduction of the spurious diapycnal mixing induced by
    vertical and lateral schemes truncation errors associated with high frequency
    motions in level models. An idealised experiment illustrates this property in
    an internal wave propagation framework. The reduction of Eulerian vertical velocities
    enables a proportional reduction of the associated advection schemes truncation
    errors. Following high frequency motions, the z ˜ -coordinate lets lateral schemes
    operate along tracer anomalies created by those motions.
  keyword: ALE, NEMO, Spurious diapycnal mixing, Vertical coordinate
  URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500311000126
  DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2011.02.001
  ISSN: '1463-5003'
- id: bleck02
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Bleck
    given: Rainer
  issued:
  - year: '2002'
    month: '1'
  accessed:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '3'
    day: '19'
  title: An oceanic general circulation model framed in hybrid isopycnic-cartesian
    coordinates
  container-title: Ocean Modelling
  page: '55-88'
  volume: '4'
  issue: '1'
  URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S1463500301000129
  DOI: 10.1016/S1463-5003(01)00012-9
  ISSN: '14635003'
  language: en-US
- id: margolin03
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Margolin
    given: L. G.
  - family: Shashkov
    given: Mikhail
  issued:
  - year: '2003'
    month: '1'
    day: '1'
  accessed:
  - year: '2016'
    month: '8'
    day: '8'
  title: Second-order sign-preserving conservative interpolation (remapping) on general
    grids
  container-title: Journal of Computational Physics
  container-title-short: Journal of Computational Physics
  page: '266-298'
  volume: '184'
  issue: '1'
  abstract: An accurate conservative interpolation (remapping) algorithm is an essential
    component of most arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian (ALE) methods. In this paper we
    describe a local remapping algorithm for a positive scalar function. This algorithm
    is second-order accurate, conservative, and sign preserving. The algorithm is
    based on estimating the mass exchanged between cells at their common interface,
    and so is equally applicable to structured and unstructured grids. We construct
    the algorithm in a series of steps, clearly delineating the assumptions and errors
    made at each step. We validate our theory with a suite of numerical examples,
    analyzing the results from the viewpoint of accuracy and order of convergence.
  keyword: ALE methods, Conservative interpolation, Remapping
  URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999102000335
  DOI: 10.1016/S0021-9991(02)00033-5
  ISSN: '0021-9991'
- id: kasahara74
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Kasahara
    given: Akira
  issued:
  - year: '1974'
    month: '7'
    day: '1'
  accessed:
  - year: '2016'
    month: '8'
    day: '15'
  title: Various vertical coordinate systems used for numerical weather prediction
  container-title: Monthly Weather Review
  container-title-short: Mon. Wea. Rev.
  page: '509-522'
  volume: '102'
  issue: '7'
  abstract: For numerical weather prediction with primitive equations (the Eulerian
    hydrodynamic equations modified by the assumption of hydrostatic equilibrium),
    various coordinate systems are used to represent the vertical structure of the
    atmosphere. In this paper, we review the essential features of prediction equations,
    satisfying the conservation of mass and total energy, in various vertical coordinate
    systems. We formulate the equations of horizontal motion, hydrostatic balance,
    mass continuity, and thermodynamics using a generalized vertical coordinate in
    which any variable that gives a single-valued monotonic relationship with a geometric
    height can be used as a vertical coordinate. Conditions to conserve total energy
    in a generalized vertical coordinate are investigated. Various prediction schemes
    using pressure, height, and potential temperature as a vertical coordinate are
    derived from the set of basic equations in the generalized coordinate system.
    These three coordinate systems are unique in that the features of prediction equations
    in each system are all distinct. We place special emphasis on handling the earth’s
    orography as the lower boundary condition. As an extension of the original idea
    of Phillips applied to the pressure-coordinate system, we propose transformed
    height and isentropic systems. In those systems, both the top of the model atmosphere
    and the earth’s surface are always coordinate surfaces. It is hoped that these
    new schemes, as in the case of the Phillips’ sigma-system, will enable us to handle
    the effect of the earth’s orography in the prediction models without lengthy coding
    logic.
  URL: http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/1520-0493(1974)102%3C0509:VVCSUF%3E2.0.CO;2
  DOI: 10.1175/1520-0493(1974)102<0509:VVCSUF>2.0.CO;2
  ISSN: '0027-0644'
- id: hirt74
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Hirt
    given: C. W
  - family: Amsden
    given: A. A
  - family: Cook
    given: J. L
  issued:
  - year: '1974'
    month: '3'
    day: '1'
  accessed:
  - year: '2016'
    month: '8'
    day: '8'
  title: An arbitrary lagrangian-eulerian computing method for all flow speeds
  container-title: Journal of Computational Physics
  container-title-short: Journal of Computational Physics
  page: '227-253'
  volume: '14'
  issue: '3'
  abstract: A new numerical technique is presented that has many advantages for obtaining
    solutions to a wide variety of time-dependent multidimensional fluid dynamics
    problems. The method uses a finite difference mesh with vertices that may be moved
    with the fluid (Lagrangian), be held fixed (Eulerian), or be moved in any other
    prescribed manner, as in the Arbitrary-Lagrangian-Eulerian (ALE) technique. In
    addition, it employs an implicit formulation similar to that of the Implicit Continuous-Fluid
    Eulerian (ICE) technique, making it applicable to flows at all speeds. This paper
    describes the basic methodology, presents finite difference approximations, and
    discusses such matters as stability, accuracy, and zoning. In addition, illustrations
    are included from a number of representative calculations.
  URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0021999174900515
  DOI: 10.1016/0021-9991(74)90051-5
  ISSN: '0021-9991'
- id: white09
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: White
    given: Laurent
  - family: Adcroft
    given: Alistair
  - family: Hallberg
    given: Robert
  issued:
  - year: '2009'
    month: '12'
  accessed:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '3'
    day: '19'
  title: High-order regridding–remapping schemes for continuous isopycnal and generalized
    coordinates in ocean models
  container-title: Journal of Computational Physics
  page: '8665-8692'
  volume: '228'
  issue: '23'
  URL: http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0021999109004628
  DOI: 10.1016/j.jcp.2009.08.016
  ISSN: '00219991'
  language: en-US
- id: white08
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: White
    given: Laurent
  - family: Adcroft
    given: Alistair
  issued:
  - year: '2008'
    month: '7'
    day: '20'
  accessed:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '11'
    day: '10'
  title: 'A high-order finite volume remapping scheme for nonuniform grids: The
    piecewise quartic method (PQM)'
  title-short: A high-order finite volume remapping scheme for nonuniform grids
  container-title: Journal of Computational Physics
  container-title-short: Journal of Computational Physics
  page: '7394-7422'
  volume: '227'
  issue: '15'
  abstract: A hierarchy of one-dimensional high-order remapping schemes is presented
    and their performance with respect to accuracy and convergence rate investigated.
    The schemes are also compared based on remapping experiments in closed domains.
    The piecewise quartic method (PQM) is presented, based on fifth-order accurate
    piecewise polynomials, and is motivated by the need to significantly improve hybrid
    coordinate systems of ocean climate models, which require the remapping to be
    conservative, monotonic and highly accurate. A limiter for this scheme is fully
    described that never decreases the polynomial degree, except at the location of
    extrema. We assess the use of high-order explicit and implicit (i.e., compact)
    estimates for the edge values and slopes needed to build the piecewise polynomials
    in both piecewise parabolic method (PPM) and PQM. It is shown that all limited
    PQM schemes perform significantly better than limited PPM schemes and that PQM
    schemes are much more cost-effective.
  keyword: Compact schemes, Finite volume method, Nonuniform grids, Piecewise parabolic
    method (PPM), Piecewise quartic method (PQM), Reconstruction, Remapping
  URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0021999108002593
  DOI: 10.1016/j.jcp.2008.04.026
  ISSN: '0021-9991'
- id: griffies00
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Griffies
    given: Stephen M.
  - family: Pacanowski
    given: Ronald C.
  - family: Hallberg
    given: Robert W.
  issued:
  - year: '2000'
    month: '3'
  accessed:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '3'
    day: '19'
  title: Spurious diapycnal mixing associated with advection in a z-coordinate ocean
    model
  container-title: Monthly Weather Review
  page: '538-564'
  volume: '128'
  issue: '3'
  URL: http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/1520-0493%282000%29128%3C0538%3ASDMAWA%3E2.0.CO%3B2
  DOI: 10.1175/1520-0493(2000)128<0538:SDMAWA>2.0.CO;2
  ISSN: 0027-0644, 1520-0493
  language: en-US
- id: morales06
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Morales Maqueda
    given: M. A.
  - family: Holloway
    given: G.
  issued:
  - year: '2006'
  accessed:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '9'
    day: '30'
  title: Second-order moment advection scheme applied to arctic ocean simulation
  container-title: Ocean Modelling
  container-title-short: Ocean Modelling
  page: '197-221'
  volume: '14'
  issue: '3'
  abstract: We apply the second-order moment (SOM) advection scheme of (Prather, M.J.
    1986. Numerical advection by conservation of second-order moments. J. Geophys.
    Res. 91, 6671–6681.) to the simulation of the large-scale circulation of the Arctic
    Ocean with a coupled ocean–sea-ice model. Compared to three other advection schemes
    commonly employed in ocean simulations (centred differences, flux corrected transport,
    and multidimensional positive definite advection transport), the SOM method helps
    preserve the vertical structure of Arctic water masses. The depth, thickness and
    hydrographic properties of the Arctic Surface Water and the Arctic Atlantic Layer
    are better represented with SOM than with any of the other three advection algorithms.
    We also present a convenient method for calculating the implicit numerical diffusivity
    of upstream based schemes, such as the SOM method, and discuss three approaches
    for improving the monotonicity properties of the SOM algorithm.
  URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500306000515
  DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2006.05.003
  ISSN: '1463-5003'
- id: burchard08
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Burchard
    given: Hans
  - family: Rennau
    given: Hannes
  issued:
  - year: '2008'
  accessed:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '9'
    day: '10'
  title: Comparative quantification of physically and numerically induced mixing in
    ocean models
  container-title: Ocean Modelling
  container-title-short: Ocean Modelling
  page: '293-311'
  volume: '20'
  issue: '3'
  abstract: 'A diagnostic method for calculating physical and numerical mixing of
    tracers in ocean models is presented. The physical mixing is defined as the turbulent
    mean tracer variance decay rate. The numerical mixing due to discretisation errors
    of tracer advection schemes is shown to be the decay rate between the advected
    square of the tracer variance and the square of the advected tracer and can be
    easily implemented into any ocean model. The applicability of the method is demonstrated
    for four test cases: (i) a one-dimensional linear advection equation with periodic
    boundary conditions, (ii) a two-dimensional flat-bottom lock exchange test case
    without mixing, (iii) a two-dimensional marginal sea overflow study with mixing
    and entrainment and (iv) the DOME test case with a dense bottom current propagating
    down a broad linear slope. The method has a number of advantages over previously
    introduced estimates for numerical mixing.'
  keyword: Advection schemes, Numerical mixing, Variance decay
  URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S146350030700128X
  DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2007.10.003
  ISSN: '1463-5003'
- id: winters95
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Winters
    given: Kraig B.
  - family: Lombard
    given: Peter N.
  - family: Riley
    given: James J.
  - family: D’Asaro
    given: Eric A.
  issued:
  - year: '1995'
    month: '4'
  accessed:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '7'
    day: '9'
  title: Available potential energy and mixing in density-stratified fluids
  container-title: Journal of Fluid Mechanics
  page: '115-128'
  volume: '289'
  abstract: A conceptual framework for analysing the energetics of density-stratified
    Boussinesq fluid flows is discussed. The concept of gravitational available potential
    energy is used to formulate an energy budget in which the evolution of the background
    potential energy, i.e. the minimum potential energy attainable through adiabatic
    motions, can be explicitly examined. For closed systems, the background potential
    energy can change only due to diabatic processes. The rate of change of background
    potential energy is proportional to the molecular diffusivity. Changes in the
    background potential energy provide a direct measure of the potential energy changes
    due to irreversible diapycnal mixing. For open systems, background potential energy
    can also change due to boundary fluxes, which can be explicitly measured. The
    analysis is particularly appropriate for evaluation of diabatic mixing rates in
    numerical simulations of turbulent flows. The energetics of a shear driven mixing
    layer is used to illustrate the analysis.
  URL: http://journals.cambridge.org/article_S002211209500125X
  DOI: 10.1017/S002211209500125X
  ISSN: '1469-7645'
- id: petersen15
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Petersen
    given: Mark R.
  - family: Jacobsen
    given: Douglas W.
  - family: Ringler
    given: Todd D.
  - family: Hecht
    given: Matthew W.
  - family: Maltrud
    given: Mathew E.
  issued:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '2'
  accessed:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '11'
    day: '12'
  title: Evaluation of the arbitrary lagrangian–Eulerian vertical coordinate method
    in the MPAS-ocean model
  container-title: Ocean Modelling
  container-title-short: Ocean Modelling
  page: '93-113'
  volume: '86'
  abstract: The vertical coordinate of the Model for Prediction Across Scales-Ocean
    (MPASMPAS-Ocean) uses the Arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian (ALEALE) method, which
    offers a variety of configurations. When fully Eulerian, the vertical coordinate
    is fixed like a z-level ocean model; when fully Lagrangian there is no vertical
    transport through the interfaces so that the mesh moves with the fluid; additional
    options for vertical coordinates exist between these two extremes, including z-star,
    z-tilde, sigma, and isopycnal coordinates. Here we evaluate spurious diapycnal
    mixing in MPASMPAS-Ocean in several idealized test cases as well as real-world
    domains with full bathymetry. Mixing data is compared to several other ocean models,
    including the Parallel Ocean Program (POPPOP) z-level and z-star formulations.
    In three-dimensional domains, MPASMPAS-Ocean has lower spurious mixing that other
    ocean models. A series of simulations show that this is likely due to MPASMPAS-Ocean’s
    hexagon-type horizontal grid cells combined with a flux-corrected transport tracer
    advection scheme designed for these unstructured meshes.The frequency-filtered
    vertical coordinate of Leclair and Madec (2011) (also called z-tilde) has been
    implemented and analyzed in MPASMPAS-Ocean. This addition allows low-frequency
    vertical transport to pass through the vertical interface in an Eulerian manner,
    while high-frequency vertical oscillations, such as internal gravity waves, are
    treated in a Lagrangian manner. Z-tilde leads to a substantial reduction in vertical
    transport across layer interfaces, and a reduction in spurious diapycnal mixing.
  keyword: Arbitrary Lagrangian–Eulerian coordinate method, Diapycnal ocean mixing,
    Ocean modeling, Unstructured mesh
  URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1463500314001796
  DOI: 10.1016/j.ocemod.2014.12.004
  ISSN: '1463-5003'
- id: griffies04
  type: book
  author:
  - family: Griffies
    given: Stephen M.
  issued:
  - year: '2004'
  title: Fundamentals of ocean climate models
  publisher: Princeton University Press
- id: saenz15
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Saenz
    given: Juan A.
  - family: Tailleux
    given: Rémi
  - family: Butler
    given: Edward D.
  - family: Hughes
    given: Graham O.
  - family: Oliver
    given: Kevin I. C.
  issued:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '2'
    day: '16'
  accessed:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '9'
    day: '11'
  title: Estimating lorenz’s reference state in an ocean with a nonlinear equation
    of state for seawater
  container-title: Journal of Physical Oceanography
  container-title-short: J. Phys. Oceanogr.
  page: '1242-1257'
  volume: '45'
  issue: '5'
  abstract: AbstractThe study of the mechanical energy budget of the oceans using
    the Lorenz available potential energy (APE) theory is based on knowledge of the
    adiabatically rearranged Lorenz reference state of minimum potential energy. The
    compressible and nonlinear character of the equation of state for seawater has
    been thought to cause the reference state to be ill defined, casting doubt on
    the usefulness of APE theory for investigating ocean energetics under realistic
    conditions. Using a method based on the volume frequency distribution of parcels
    as a function of temperature and salinity in the context of the seawater Boussinesq
    approximation, which is illustrated using climatological data, the authors show
    that compressibility effects are in fact minor. The reference state can be regarded
    as a well-defined one-dimensional function of depth, which forms a surface in
    temperature, salinity, and density space between the surface and the bottom of
    the ocean. For a very small proportion of water masses, this surface can be multivalued
    and water parcels can have up to two statically stable levels in the reference
    density profile, of which the shallowest is energetically more accessible. Classifying
    parcels from the surface to the bottom gives a different reference density profile
    than classifying in the opposite direction. However, this difference is negligible.
    This study shows that the reference state obtained by standard sorting methods
    is equivalent to, though computationally more expensive than, the volume frequency
    distribution approach. The approach that is presented can be applied systematically
    and in a computationally efficient manner to investigate the APE budget of the
    ocean circulation using models or climatological data.
  keyword: Buoyancy, Circulation/ Dynamics, Forcing, Ocean circulation
  URL: http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/JPO-D-14-0105.1
  DOI: 10.1175/JPO-D-14-0105.1
  ISSN: '0022-3670'
- id: nikurashin13
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Nikurashin
    given: M.
  - family: Ferrari
    given: R.
  issued:
  - year: '2013'
    month: '6'
    day: '28'
  accessed:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '5'
    day: '15'
  title: Overturning circulation driven by breaking internal waves in the deep ocean
  container-title: Geophysical Research Letters
  container-title-short: Geophys. Res. Lett.
  page: '3133-3137'
  volume: '40'
  issue: '12'
  abstract: A global estimate of the water-mass transformation by internal wave-driven
    mixing in the deep ocean is presented. The estimate is based on the energy conversion
    from tidal and geostrophic motions into internal waves combined with a turbulent
    mixing parameterization. We show that internal wave-driven mixing in the deep
    ocean can sustain 20–30 Sv of water-mass transformation. One third or more of
    this transformation is attributed to lee waves generated by geostrophic motions
    flowing over rough topography, primarily in the Southern Ocean. While these results
    are uncertain due to many assumptions, poorly constrained parameters and data
    noise that enter in the calculation, the result that lee wave-driven mixing plays
    an important role in the abyssal ocean circulation is likely robust. The implication
    is that lee wave-driven mixing should be represented in ocean and climate models,
    but currently it is not.
  keyword: 4520 Eddies and mesoscale processes, 4532 General circulation, 4544 Internal
    and inertial waves, 4562 Topographic/bathymetric interactions, 4568 Turbulence,
    diffusion, and mixing processes, internal tides, internal waves, lee waves, overturning
    circulation, turbulent mixing, water-mass transformation
  URL: http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/grl.50542/abstract
  DOI: 10.1002/grl.50542
  ISSN: '1944-8007'
  language: en-US
- id: gouillon10
  type: thesis
  author:
  - family: Gouillon
    given: Flavien
  issued:
  - year: '2010'
  title: Internal wave propagation and numerically induced diapycnal mixing in oceanic
    general circulation models
  publisher: Florida State University
  genre: PhD thesis
  URL: http://purl.flvc.org/fsu/fd/FSU_migr_etd-4096
- id: tomita01
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - literal: Tomita, Hirofumi
  - family: Tsugawa
    given: Motohiko
  - literal: Satoh, Masaki
  - literal: Goto, Koji
  issued:
  - year: '2001'
  title: Shallow water model on a modified icosahedral geodesic grid by using spring
    dynamics
  DOI: 10.1006/jcph.2001.6897
- id: armour16
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Armour
    given: Kyle C.
  - family: Marshall
    given: John
  - family: Scott
    given: Jeffery R.
  - family: Donohoe
    given: Aaron
  - family: Newsom
    given: Emily R.
  issued:
  - year: '2016'
    month: '7'
  accessed:
  - year: '2016'
    month: '8'
    day: '16'
  title: Southern ocean warming delayed by circumpolar upwelling and equatorward transport
  container-title: Nature Geoscience
  container-title-short: Nature Geosci
  page: '549-554'
  volume: '9'
  issue: '7'
  abstract: 'The Southern Ocean has shown little warming over recent decades, in
    stark contrast to the rapid warming observed in the Arctic. Along the northern
    flank of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current, however, the upper ocean has warmed
    substantially. Here we present analyses of oceanographic observations and general
    circulation model simulations showing that these patterns—of delayed warming south
    of the Antarctic Circumpolar Current and enhanced warming to the north—are fundamentally
    shaped by the Southern Ocean’s meridional overturning circulation: wind-driven
    upwelling of unmodified water from depth damps warming around Antarctica; greenhouse
    gas-induced surface heat uptake is largely balanced by anomalous northward heat
    transport associated with the equatorward flow of surface waters; and heat is
    preferentially stored where surface waters are subducted to the north. Further,
    these processes are primarily due to passive advection of the anomalous warming
    signal by climatological ocean currents; changes in ocean circulation are secondary.
    These findings suggest the Southern Ocean responds to greenhouse gas forcing on
    the centennial, or longer, timescale over which the deep ocean waters that are
    upwelled to the surface are warmed themselves. It is against this background of
    gradual warming that multidecadal Southern Ocean temperature trends must be understood.
    View full text'
  keyword: Climate and Earth system modelling, Physical oceanography
  URL: http://www.nature.com/ngeo/journal/v9/n7/abs/ngeo2731.html
  DOI: 10.1038/ngeo2731
  ISSN: '1752-0894'
  language: en-US
- id: gentry66
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Gentry
    given: Richard A
  - family: Martin
    given: Robert E
  - family: Daly
    given: Bart J
  issued:
  - year: '1966'
    month: '8'
    day: '1'
  accessed:
  - year: '2016'
    month: '8'
    day: '17'
  title: An eulerian differencing method for unsteady compressible flow problems
  container-title: Journal of Computational Physics
  container-title-short: Journal of Computational Physics
  page: '87-118'
  volume: '1'
  issue: '1'
  abstract: 'An Eulerian finite difference method is presented which can be used
    with a high-speed computer to solve the time-dependent equations of motion for
    the compressible flow of a fluid. The difference equations are described in detail,
    and the nature of the truncation errors introduced by the numerical approximations
    is discussed, as are the stability properties of the equations. Three solutions
    involving time-dependent flow in two space dimensions are described and analyzed:
    the diffraction of a weak shock travelling through a z-shaped tunnel, the interaction
    of a supersonic blunt body with a plane shock wave, and the passage of a plane
    shock over a conical body. Good agreement with experimental data is obtained in
    all cases where comparisons are made.'
  URL: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0021999166900143
  DOI: 10.1016/0021-9991(66)90014-3
  ISSN: '0021-9991'
- id: gent90
  type: article-journal
  author:
  - family: Gent
    given: Peter R.
  - family: McWilliams
    given: James C.
  issued:
  - year: '1990'
    month: '1'
    day: '1'
  accessed:
  - year: '2015'
    month: '3'
    day: '20'
  title: Isopycnal mixing in ocean circulation models
  container-title: Journal of Physical Oceanography
  container-title-short: J. Phys. Oceanogr.
  page: '150-155'
  volume: '20'
  issue: '1'
  abstract: Abstract A subgrid-scale form for mesoscale eddy mixing on isopycnal surfaces
    is proposed for use in non-eddy-resolving ocean circulation models. The mixing
    is applied in isopycnal coordinates to isopycnal layer thickness, or inverse density
    gradient, as well as to passive scalars, temperature and salinity. The transformation
    of these mixing forms to physical coordinates is also presented.
  URL: http://journals.ametsoc.org/doi/abs/10.1175/1520-0485%281990%29020%3C0150%3AIMIOCM%3E2.0.CO%3B2
  DOI: 10.1175/1520-0485(1990)020<0150:IMIOCM>2.0.CO;2
  ISSN: '0022-3670'
...
